These conditions are sometimes called treatments. Example 10-1 described such an experiment;
the two different treatments are two paint formulations, and the response is the drying
time. The purpose of the study is to determine whether the new formulation results in a significant
effect—reducing drying time. In this situation, the product developer (the experimenter)
randomly assigned 10 test specimens to one formulation and 10 test specimens to the other
formulation. Then the paints were applied to the test specimens in random order until all 20
specimens were painted. This is an example of a completely randomized experiment.
When statistical significance is observed in a randomized experiment, the experimenter
can be confident in the conclusion that the difference in treatments resulted in the difference
in response. That is, we can be confident that a cause-and-effect relationship has been found.
Sometimes the objects to be used in the comparison are not assigned at random to the treatments.
For example, the September 1992 issue of Circulation (a medical journal published
by the American Heart Association) reports a study linking high iron levels in the body with
increased risk of heart attack. The study, done in Finland, tracked 1931 men for five years
and showed a statistically significant effect of increasing iron levels on the incidence of heart
attacks. In this study, the comparison was not performed by randomly selecting a sample of
men and then assigning some to a “low iron level” treatment and the others to a “high iron
level” treatment. The researchers just tracked the subjects over time. Recall from Chapter 1
that this type of study is called an observational study.
It is difficult to identify causality in observational studies because the observed statistically
significant difference in response for the two groups may be due to some other underlying
factor (or group of factors) that was not equalized by randomization and not due to the treatments.
For example, the difference in heart attack risk could be attributable to the difference in
iron levels or to other underlying factors that form a reasonable explanation for the observed
results—such as cholesterol levels or hypertension.